README.md, before:

# PhreakNIC 26 Badge Server

Python web service for managing PhreakNIC badge artwork, from attendee selection through to firmware generation.

## Features
- Attendee badge page (`/badges/{unique_id}`) shows the badge holder’s name and current artwork options. (Legacy `/id={unique_id}` still works.) A landing page `/` lets users enter their badge ID.
- Admin artwork screen (`/admin/images`) lets authenticated staff add, preview, and delete available badge artwork.
- Admin badge management screen (`/admin/badges`) registers badge IDs, names, and MAC addresses, shows the most recent personalised image, and surfaces firmware download links per badge.
- Admin hub (`/admin`) links to badge management and artwork tools behind a single login.
- Programmatic badge API (`POST /admin/api/badges`) lets trusted systems register attendees (ID, name, MAC) via JSON.
- JSON lookup endpoints allow trusted systems or devices to resolve badges by MAC address.
- Firmware generation pipeline patches a default binary with personalised artwork so staff can download ready-to-flash firmware per badge.
- Each generated firmware also records an 8-byte SHA256 hash prefix so tooling can verify the payload before flashing.
- Built with FastAPI, SQLAlchemy’s async engine, Jinja2 templates, and lightweight HTML/CSS for quick operator workflows.

## Prerequisites
1. Python 3.11+
2. PostgreSQL instance with access credentials.
3. [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for dependency and virtualenv management.
4. [`alembic`](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/) (already listed in `pyproject.toml`) for database migrations.

Install dependencies with:
```bash
uv sync
```

Run the development server:
```bash
uv run uvicorn app.main:app --reload
```

## Configuration
Set the following environment variables before launching the app:

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `DATABASE_URL` | PostgreSQL connection string (`postgresql://user:pass@host:port/dbname`) |
| `WORK_BASIC_AUTH_USERNAME` | Username required for all admin endpoints |
| `WORK_BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD` | Password required for all admin endpoints |
| `DB_POOL_MIN_SIZE` *(optional)* | Minimum PostgreSQL pool size (default `1`) |
| `DB_POOL_MAX_SIZE` *(optional)* | Maximum PostgreSQL pool size (default `10`) |

Use the same credentials to access `/admin/badges`, `/admin/images`, and the admin APIs.

## Database Migrations
The project uses Alembic for schema management.

- **Fresh database:** create the database, ensure `DATABASE_URL` is set, then run:
  ```bash
  alembic upgrade head
  ```
- **Existing database (pre-Alembic):** tell Alembic the current schema is at the baseline revision, then run the latest migrations:
  ```bash
  alembic stamp b8bec1855043
  alembic upgrade head
  ```

Run migrations every time you pull changes that update the schema.

## Database Schema
Below is the schema that corresponds to the current migrations. Adjust names and columns as needed, but preserve the referenced fields.

```sql
CREATE TABLE badges (
    unique_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    mac_address VARCHAR(17) UNIQUE,
    firmware_base64 TEXT,
    selected_image_label TEXT,
    selected_image_base64 TEXT,
    selected_image_mime_type TEXT,
    selected_image_color TEXT,
    selected_image_font TEXT,
    selected_font_size INTEGER,
    selected_text_x INTEGER,
    selected_text_y INTEGER
);

CREATE TABLE badge_images (
    unique_id TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES badges(unique_id) ON DELETE CASCADE,
    image_label TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_base64 TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_mime_type TEXT,
    PRIMARY KEY (unique_id, image_label)
);

CREATE TABLE available_images (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    image_label TEXT UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    image_base64 TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_mime_type TEXT,
    image_color TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_font TEXT NOT NULL
);
```

## Endpoints

- `GET /badges/{unique_id}`  
  Renders badge details and available images. Selecting an image and submitting the form saves the personalised artwork and firmware for later download. (Legacy `/id={unique_id}` remains available.)

- `POST /badges/{unique_id}`  
  Handles image selection submission, renders a personalised preview, patches the default firmware, and stores the results with the badge record. On success, redirects back to the GET view with a confirmation banner.

- `GET /admin` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Landing page that links to badge creation and artwork management tools.

- `GET /admin/images` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Shows the upload form plus a gallery of existing artwork with delete buttons.

- `POST /admin/images` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Saves or replaces an available image.

- `POST /admin/images/delete` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Deletes an available image by label.

- `GET /admin/badges` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Displays a form to register or update attendees, including MAC addresses used by firmware tooling.

- `POST /admin/badges` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Saves the badge ID, name, and MAC address so the attendee can access `/badges/{unique_id}`.

- `POST /admin/api/badges` *(Basic Auth, JSON)*  
  Accepts a JSON body `{"unique_id": "...", "name": "...", "mac_address": "AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF"}` and returns `201 Created` for new badges or `200 OK` when updating an existing record. The MAC address is normalised and must be unique.

- `GET /admin/api/badges/mac/{mac_address}` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Returns the full badge profile (ID, name, available images, latest firmware, firmware hash) for the given MAC address. Responds with `404` if no badge matches.

- `GET /api/badges/mac/{mac_address}`  
  Public JSON endpoint that returns the badge ID, name, MAC address, and current firmware hash (if generated). Useful for firmware tools that only know the hardware MAC.

- `GET /healthz`  
  Lightweight readiness probe returning `{"status": "ok"}`.

## Error Handling & Security
- All database interactions run through SQLAlchemy’s async engine with an explicit session per request.
- Basic authentication with constant-time comparisons protects the admin endpoints.
- Graceful error messages are displayed for badge lookup and save failures.
- Admin pages reuse the same basic auth and surface upload/save errors inline.

## Testing
Install optional development dependencies:
```bash
uv sync --group dev
```

Add tests under `tests/` using `pytest` and `pytest-asyncio`. Run them with:
```bash
uv run pytest
```

## Containerised Deployment
Build and run everything with Docker Compose:

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
```

This starts the FastAPI app on port `8000` and a PostgreSQL 15 instance with seeded credentials. Override environment variables in `docker-compose.yml` or export them before running to suit your environment. Stop the stack with:

```bash
docker compose down
```

Commit message:

Enhance README with detailed badge management features and improve MAC address normalization function

README.md, after:

# PhreakNIC 26 Badge Server

Python web service for managing PhreakNIC badge artwork, from attendee selection through to firmware generation.

## Features
- Attendee badge page (`/badges/{unique_id}`) shows the badge holder’s name and current artwork options. (Legacy `/id={unique_id}` still works.) A landing page `/` lets users enter their badge ID.
- Admin artwork screen (`/admin/images`) lets authenticated staff add, preview, and delete available badge artwork.
- Admin badge management screen (`/admin/badges`) registers badge IDs, names, and MAC addresses, shows the most recent personalised image, and surfaces firmware download links (with hashes) per badge. Previews can be enlarged in-place so you can review pixel-perfect artwork before flashing.
- Admin hub (`/admin`) links to badge management and artwork tools behind a single login.
- Programmatic badge API (`POST /admin/api/badges`) lets trusted systems register attendees (ID, name, MAC) via JSON.
- JSON lookup endpoints allow trusted systems or devices to resolve badges by MAC address.
- Firmware generation pipeline patches a default binary with personalised artwork so staff can download ready-to-flash firmware per badge.
- Each generated firmware also records an 8-byte SHA256 hash prefix so tooling can verify the payload before flashing.
- Built with FastAPI, SQLAlchemy’s async engine, Jinja2 templates, and lightweight HTML/CSS for quick operator workflows.

## Prerequisites
1. Python 3.11+
2. PostgreSQL instance with access credentials.
3. [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for dependency and virtualenv management.
4. [`alembic`](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/) (already listed in `pyproject.toml`) for database migrations.

Install dependencies with:
```bash
uv sync
```

Run the development server:
```bash
uv run uvicorn app.main:app --reload
```

## Configuration
Set the following environment variables before launching the app:

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `DATABASE_URL` | PostgreSQL connection string (`postgresql://user:pass@host:port/dbname`) |
| `WORK_BASIC_AUTH_USERNAME` | Username required for all admin endpoints |
| `WORK_BASIC_AUTH_PASSWORD` | Password required for all admin endpoints |
| `DB_POOL_MIN_SIZE` *(optional)* | Minimum PostgreSQL pool size (default `1`) |
| `DB_POOL_MAX_SIZE` *(optional)* | Maximum PostgreSQL pool size (default `10`) |

Use the same credentials to access `/admin/badges`, `/admin/images`, and the admin APIs.

## Database Migrations
The project uses Alembic for schema management.

- **Fresh database:** create the database, ensure `DATABASE_URL` is set, then run:
  ```bash
  alembic upgrade head
  ```
- **Existing database (pre-Alembic):** tell Alembic the current schema is at the baseline revision, then run the latest migrations:
  ```bash
  alembic stamp b8bec1855043
  alembic upgrade head
  ```

Run migrations every time you pull changes that update the schema.

## Database Schema
Below is the schema that corresponds to the current migrations. Adjust names and columns as needed, but preserve the referenced fields.

```sql
CREATE TABLE badges (
    unique_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    mac_address VARCHAR(17) UNIQUE,
    firmware_base64 TEXT,
    selected_image_label TEXT,
    selected_image_base64 TEXT,
    selected_image_mime_type TEXT,
    selected_image_color TEXT,
    selected_image_font TEXT,
    selected_font_size INTEGER,
    selected_text_x INTEGER,
    selected_text_y INTEGER
);

CREATE TABLE badge_images (
    unique_id TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES badges(unique_id) ON DELETE CASCADE,
    image_label TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_base64 TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_mime_type TEXT,
    PRIMARY KEY (unique_id, image_label)
);

CREATE TABLE available_images (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    image_label TEXT UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    image_base64 TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_mime_type TEXT,
    image_color TEXT NOT NULL,
    image_font TEXT NOT NULL
);
```

## Web Endpoints

- `GET /badges/{unique_id}`  
  Renders badge details and available images. Selecting an image and submitting the form saves the personalised artwork and firmware for later download. (Legacy `/id={unique_id}` remains available.)

- `POST /badges/{unique_id}`  
  Handles image selection submission, renders a personalised preview, patches the default firmware, and stores the results with the badge record. On success, redirects back to the GET view with a confirmation banner.

- `GET /admin` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Landing page that links to badge creation and artwork management tools.

- `GET /admin/images` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Shows the upload form plus a gallery of existing artwork with delete buttons.

- `POST /admin/images` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Saves or replaces an available image.

- `POST /admin/images/delete` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Deletes an available image by label.

- `GET /admin/badges` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Displays a form to register or update attendees, including MAC addresses used by firmware tooling. The page also lists saved badge artwork, lets you zoom each preview, and provides download/hash metadata for the latest firmware.

- `POST /admin/badges` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Saves the badge ID, name, and MAC address so the attendee can access `/badges/{unique_id}`.

- `POST /admin/api/badges` *(Basic Auth, JSON)*  
  Accepts a JSON body `{"unique_id": "...", "name": "...", "mac_address": "AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF"}` and returns `201 Created` for new badges or `200 OK` when updating an existing record. The MAC address is normalised and must be unique.

- `GET /admin/api/badges/mac/{mac_address}` *(Basic Auth)*  
  Returns the full badge profile (ID, name, available images, latest firmware, firmware hash) for the given MAC address. Responds with `404` if no badge matches.

- `GET /api/badges/mac/{mac_address}`  
  Public JSON endpoint that returns the badge ID, name, MAC address, and current firmware hash (if generated). Useful for firmware tools that only know the hardware MAC.

## Badge Customisation Workflow
1. Attendees visit `/badges/{unique_id}` to choose artwork.
2. The preview canvas uses nearest-neighbour scaling so images stay pixel-perfect while users drag the name overlay to their preferred location.
3. When the badge is saved, the server renders the final PNG, patches the default firmware binary, records the SHA256 hash prefix, and stores everything alongside the badge.
4. Admins can confirm the placement by zooming the preview on `/admin/badges` and download the ready-to-flash firmware directly from the list page.

- `GET /healthz`  
  Lightweight readiness probe returning `{"status": "ok"}`.

## API Endpoints

- `POST /admin/api/badges` *(Basic Auth, JSON)*  
  Accepts a JSON body `{"unique_id": "...", "name": "...", "mac_address": "AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF"}` and returns `201 Created` for new badges or `200 OK` when updating an existing record. The MAC address is normalised and must be unique.

- `GET /api/badges/mac/{mac_address}`  
  Public JSON endpoint that returns the badge ID, name, MAC address, and current firmware hash (if generated). Useful for firmware tools that only know the hardware MAC.

## Error Handling & Security
- All database interactions run through SQLAlchemy’s async engine with an explicit session per request.
- Basic authentication with constant-time comparisons protects the admin endpoints.
- Graceful error messages are displayed for badge lookup and save failures.
- Admin pages reuse the same basic auth and surface upload/save errors inline.

## Testing
Install optional development dependencies:
```bash
uv sync --group dev
```

Add tests under `tests/` using `pytest` and `pytest-asyncio`. Run them with:
```bash
uv run pytest
```

## Containerised Deployment
Build and run everything with Docker Compose:

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
```

This starts the FastAPI app on port `8000` and a PostgreSQL 15 instance with seeded credentials. Override environment variables in `docker-compose.yml` or export them before running to suit your environment. Stop the stack with:

```bash
docker compose down
```
